---
title: "Data types"
date: "2020-03-16T05:35:07.322Z"
author: Ashleigh Richardson
---

# 📊 Data Types

Now we know where to write and run code, let's start with the fundamentals of how to write code. We'll begin with the simplest data types that exist in Python.

## 🔢 Numbers
There are two main ways to represent numbers in Python; integers and floats.

### Integers
Integers, or `int`s, are whole numbers, with no decimal component. So for instance `1`, `5`, `43243`, `0`, and `-2` would all be integers.

### Floats
Floats are numbers with a decimal component. `2.4`, `1.0`, `0.0`, `-8.63495` are all floats.

### Fractions
There is no in-built data type for fractions in Python. We just use the closest float, or the syntax for integer division (which we'll see later), which evaluates to the closest float.

### Floating point errors
Python converts all numbers to binary under the hood (those sequences of 1s and 0s). However, it's suprisingly difficult to represent most of the decimals and fractions in binary, and often the number actually stored is very slightly different to that which was requested. When we print a number to the shell, Python typically truncates it to a reasonable number of decimal places, so we don't see these tiny differences. However, if you're doing something that involves a lot of math, it's possible for these small differences to stack up and cause errors in your program if not properly managed.

As an example, let's print out the first 20 decimal places of the number stored as 0.1:
```
>>> print("%0.20f" % 0.1)
0.10000000000000000555
```
Note: you can ignore the confusing syntax here, it essentially just says 'print the float 0.1 to 20 decimal places'.

## 📖 Words
The data type used for words in Python is the string. While some programming languages may make a distinction between the data types for individual characters and entire words, Python uses the string for both.

### Strings
A string, or `str`, is a sequence of zero or more characters surrounding by quotation marks. Single or double quotations are both fine as long as they're the same on either side of the string. Some examples of simple strings include `'hello'`, `'h'`, `"hello"`, `"How are you?"`, `'1234'`.

### Empty strings
The empty string is represented as two quotation marks with nothing in between. E.g. `""` or `''`. This is different from `" "` or `' '`, which is a non-empty string containing a space.

### Special characters
Some characters have special meaning when used in a string.
TODO: table of the main ones + examples of how to \escape them and also why to use both kinds of quotations

## 📋 Ordered collections
TODO
